So, creating de-normalized tables.
In this demo, we're going to walk through the basis of data
modeling from normalized form to de-normalized form.
We're going to create tables and Postgres,
insert rows of data,
and do more simple joins to show how multiple tables can work together.
Again, remember these examples are simple but imagine the situation that scale
with large databases and many users and the need for quick response time.
So, again because we're doing de-normalization and that's all about performance.
The fact that we're walking to this demo with a simple example you may think,
"Why would that be necessary?"
In this case in this small demo, it really isn't.
But again, imagine that we need low latency and quick response time,
and we're working at scale.
Again, we're going to import that library,
and I'm going to connect to my database the same way we've done in the past.
Okay, let's get started.
Let's start with our normalized and third normal form data set,
the set of tables we had in the last exercise.
But we've now added a new table called song length.
So, again, we're going to have our album library,
song library, artists library and song length.
Again, we have the same columns,
again all the columns that we had in our third normal form.
Now, we've added this new table,
again I can show you these tables that we created. Song length.
So, we're going to have one column for song ID,
and the other column for song length in seconds.
So, here are our tables,
and here's our song ID and there's song length in seconds.
So, this is all in third normal form.
So, in this next statement here,
we're just going to create all those tables and do those inserts and nothing fancy here.
So, let's go ahead and just- you just need to run this here.
Then again, it's a lot of code.
It may look overwhelming but it's really not,
it's just really going through creating the table and then writing the insert statements.
Then from there when we get to- yeah. So, we're just going to run that.
Then in this next cell we're actually going to print those results.
Make sure everything got into the table correctly.
Great. We have our album library,
where we have our albums, our song library,
our artists library, we've just had that one result and our song length.
So, again this is all about our queries.
Let's say we want to do a query that gives us all of these columns artist ID,
artist name, album ID,
album name, year, song ID,
song name, and song length.
We want everything. So, in this case,
we're going to have to perform a three way join on four tables we've created.
So, we can do that. It is possible.
Let's just take a look here at this join here.
This code is a little bit ugly here probably
in the demo that may be something you want to look at later.
So, we're going to select all of those columns,
and then we're going to do a join.
We're going to do a- first our join is going to be an artist library
and album library and we're going to join on the artist ID.
Then from there after we've done that join,
we're going to do our next join which is on song library.
Then we're going to join that with on the columns album
ID from album library and song library.album ID.
That's the column that will join those two tables together.
After those tables are joined together,
we're going to join them with another table which is the song length table when we're
going to utilize the columns of song ID on both the song library and song length.
It's a pretty complicated query.
So, let's run that.
Okay, awesome. Well, it worked.
We got all the information that we wanted.
So, great we were able to get all the data that we
wanted but we had to do a three way join to get there.
While it's great that we have that flexibility,
we have to remember that joins are slow and if we have
a really heavy workload that requires low latency queries,
we want to reduce the number of joins.
Let's think about de-normalizing our normalized table.
With de-normalization, we want to think about the queries that we're running and how
we can reduce the number of joins even if that means duplicating the data.
So, let's just get an example of some of the queries that we might want to run.
So, in this example, let's say query one.
I want a list all my songs. That's what I want.
That's ultimately what I want.
I want to do a select.
I want artist name,
album name, year, song name, and song length.
That's the the columns that I want to see.
I want that from a minimum number of tables.
I don't want to have to do a ton of joins. Then my second query.
I want to know the length of each album in seconds.
So, I'm going to select my album name,
and then I'm probably going to want to do sum and aggregation on my song length.
Then from there, again,
I want to use a minimum number of tables,
then I'm going to group by album.
So, let's look at our first query first.
So, again we just discussed the query that
we're looking at which is select artist name, album name,
year, song name, and song length from a minimum number of tables.
To reduce the number of tables,
this is a little bit more straightforward.
Let's first add song length to
the song library table and artist name to the album library.
So, from here, we're going to create a table.
Again, album library, album ID,
album name, artist name, and year.
Then we're going to create a table called song library.
Song ID, album ID,
song name, and song length.
So, this is what the tables would look like.
So, then we're going to go through the process of actually creating those.
Actually these are both going to be called album library one and song library one.
So, we're going to create these tables and do those insert statements.
That's what we're doing in this cell here.
Again, it is a lot of code but it's pretty straightforward what it's doing. So, great.
We were able to insert all of those rows, no errors were thrown.
So, now we can do a simplified query to get the information we need.
We're only going to have to use one join
because now we only have two tables with our information.
Select artist name, album name, year,
song name, song length,
from song ID one.
We're going to join that with album library one on song
library.album ID and album library one.album ID.
So, that's the common foreign key we're going to join on that column.
When we execute that,
we get back the information that we wanted.
Now, we have a query of all the songs that I have in my music library.
As you can see, let's just scroll back there really quick.
As you can see, we do have some duplicate data now.
The album ID is now represented in both tables, and that's okay.
So, now let's say that we also want to run this query which is select album name,
song length from a minimum number of tables and group by the album name.
So, basically what it's saying,
I want to know how long each one of my albums is.
We should be able to do a join on the tables that we created.
But what if we don't want to do a join at all?
Maybe this is something I need to be able to return to
my users of my database very quickly.
I don't want to have to do a join.
So, why don't just create a new table with just the information we need. That's okay.
So, let's just create a table called album length,
song ID, album ID, and song length.
I don't need any other information.
I just need the album name.
So, in this case,
I'm going to create a table called album length with the song ID,
album ID and song length.
That's all I need in my query as we see here.
So, I'm just going to create that.
Yes, I'm going to have some duplicate data,
but that's okay. So, let's run that.
This is going to create the table,
and we're going to do the inserts.
Now, let's run our query.
So, now we're able to do this, select album name,
sum on the song length,
from album length group by album name. No joins there.
It's very quickly great performance.
So, here's my album Rubber Soul.
It's 445 seconds long,
and Let It Be which is 467 seconds long of the songs that I own.
So, we have successfully taken a normalized set of tables and de-normalized
them in order to speed up our performance and allow for simpler queries to be executed.
So, then again, for the sake of this demo,
we're going to drop all those tables that we created.
Again, we're going to close our connection.